---
title: "Mitigating 3D printing defects via cyber-physical systems: a process for fabricating defect-free components"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2025-07-17-mitigating-3d-printing-defects
excerpt: "This paper reviews the impact of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) integration in 3D printing, focusing on its role in reducing defects and enabling real-time monitoring and control for defect-free component fabrication."
date: 2025-07-17
venue: "The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology"
paperurl: "https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-025-16100-x"
citation: "Omiyale, B.O., Ogedengbe, I.I., Odeyemi, J., Ogbeyemi, A., Olorunsogbon, F., & Zhang, W. C. (2025). Mitigating 3D printing defects via cyber-physical systems: a process for fabricating defect-free components. *The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 139*, 3175–3196."
---

Cyber-physical systems (CPS) integrate physical processes with computational algorithms, real-time data analysis, and control systems. In the context of 3D printing, CPS enhances the interaction between the digital model and the physical machine through sensors, feedback loops, and real-time processing. By incorporating CPS into 3D printing, efficiency improves, real-time monitoring and control become feasible, and the development of digital twins for predictive analytics is facilitated. This integration leads to higher product quality and increased sustainability. Defects in 3D printing, such as warping, layer misalignment, and voids, often result from factors like material inconsistencies, nozzle clogging, temperature fluctuations, printer misalignment, and inconsistent printing speeds, all of which compromise the quality and reliability of 3D-printed products. The integration of CPS can help mitigate these challenges by enabling real-time adjustments and optimizing process parameters in several ways. Furthermore, CPS in 3D printing offers opportunities for cost-effective production planning, improved efficiency, and precise management while reducing defects in additively manufactured parts. With CPS, 3D printing machines can be operated and monitored remotely, minimizing the need for human intervention. This paper reviews the impact of CPS integration in 3D printing, specifically focusing on its role in reducing defects in fabricated parts. The key objective of this review is to analyze existing literature on enhancing CPS to minimize internal flaws in 3D-printed components, ultimately leading to the production of defect-free functional parts. One main contribution of this review is to serve as a foundation for future technological advancements, towards a deeper understanding of how CPS can effectively prevent defect formation in additively manufactured components.